[MUSIC PLAYING]
RADIO ANNOUNCER:
This is [INAUDIBLE]
102.5 Los Angeles, coming at
you live at the top of the hour.
If you are on the
405 southbounds,
you are not going to be happy.
A collision at Century
has the two right lanes
blocked and traffic backed to
the Wilshire Boulevard on-ramp.
Authorities are working
on clearing the lanes.
But in the meantime--
[CAR HORNS]
Shit.
I can't recall the exact
moment when I realized
my life was out of control.
[MOAN]
I had survived a dysfunctional
childhood, two divorces,
single parenthood, the
Northridge earthquake,
dealt with my mother's
Alzheimer's disease,
and my hair had finally grown
back after a year of chemo.
But what was about to unfold
would be the catalyst that
would lead me on a
journey of self-discovery,
empowerment, and a
reconnection to the whole.
(SCREAMING) Oh,
come on, god dammit!
Move!
Pearl, you are late.
I know, I know.
My cell phone wouldn't work--
-John wants you to call him.
-OK.
[INAUDIBLE].
This can wait.
Mike wants that file ASAP.
[PHONE RINGING]
You're late, Ms. Weaver.
I'm sorry, traffic.
That's why they
invented cell phones.
Right.
The notes on the joint
venture for the Soderburg deal.
I told you last night
to have them printed
out for this morning's meeting.
And I gave you specific
instructions to leave
them on my desk for review.
Well, they weren't there.
They're not on my computer,
and the originals are missing.
So where the hell are they, Pam?
Did you delete them
from my computer?
No of course I didn't delete
them from your computer--
-I don't want to hear it.
-Look--
You're not fooling me--
Calm down.
I will--
Don't condescend me!
I'll print out another
one for the meeting, OK?
Well, you certainly
aren't behaving
like a patriotic-- oh, my God.
Saddam has had plenty of time to
conduct those weapons searches.
OFFICE WORKER: Yeah,
but what if there are
no weapons of mass destruction?
Why start a whole military
conflict on something
that's not even definite?
So you know more than
the president, I guess?
Well, that's not saying much.
Well, then just let
him ask where you're--
Guys, guys, guys.
I can't hear, OK?
Hello, yes?
Yes, hello?
Yes.
Did you locate
those papers yet?
Mike, it's my daughter.
She's been arrested.
It's not like she's
going anywhere.
I need those papers
before 11:00.
They got my grandson.
You walk out now, and you
will suffer the consequences.
Right where I left it.
A few weeks before, I had
received a call in the middle
of the night from
an unknown caller,
telling me my
daughter had broken
into my house, stolen checks,
credit cards, and my identity.
She was held up in a motel
across town with my grandson,
intending on leaving the
state the next morning.
I called the police, but
she had already checked
out by the time they arrived.
They finally caught
up with her when
she went to retrieve her
belongings from a storage shed
and had paid the fees
with a stolen check.
Insufficient evidence.
That's what the judge
said, so they released her.
Two years passed, and her
drug use and criminal behavior
increased.
She also now had two more
children, and I was to learn,
pregnant with her fourth baby.
ARIANA: Mom, I
know I've told you
before about how I'm
not-- I'm not doing drugs,
and that I'm fine.
But I'm not.
PAM: All the self-help groups
and books preached tough love.
Don't give into the con.
I mean, she was talented.
She got-- she was
picked out of 1,500 kids
to be in Hollywood High School,
a dream that I had growing up.
And she was good at
it, and she blew it.
Instead of going to
school, she would
be hanging out with
all the druggies
on Hollywood Boulevard.
She knew them by first name.
No.
The answer's no.
Why?
I buried my mother, and
you break into my house.
How in the world do you
expect me to trust you?
I need your help.
PAM: She burned
me so many times.
Then what the f--
I'm sorry.
No.
You're my mother.
You're my flesh and blood!
Only when it's convenient.
-Please.
I need help, Mom.
PAM: Devin, don't
draw on the wall.
Bring that down.
You can play-- you can use it
on the-- on the-- the, um-- God,
I don't know what
I'm going to do.
I mean, the-- the
authorities tell me
if I don't take
custody of the kids,
they're going to put
them in foster care.
And my-- my job.
I mean, who's going to
take care of the kids?
My house is too small.
Yeah, you know, my-- my boss?
He wouldn't even grant me
time off when I was-- when
my mother was dying, you know?
And I had to wait an entire
week to bury her on a weekend.
[KIDS SHRIEKING]
My God, what do I do?
No, Devin.
Put that away.
I think it's admirable that
you're taking all this on, Pam,
but I've got to tell you.
Our relationship did not include
taking care of all these kids.
It's your decision.
What are you saying?
I'm saying kids--
[CLUNK]
[BABY TALK]
Kids were never a
part of the package.
[BABY TALK]
CHILD: Where's John going?
Where's John--
where's John going?
I don't know, honey.
OK, OK.
And it was very
difficult to see her.
And she came up to
me and she said,
mom, it wasn't your fault. I
had the dream everybody wanted.
I had a job.
I had moved to California
for my career as an actress.
I had my own house
in California,
and I got it on my own.
And I was selling it.
Why?
Because what if my
daughter didn't make it
and I did have to take the kids?
I had no room.
So I bought a bigger house.
And I had no job.
And I know nobody in Texas.
But it was a leap of faith.
I hate the fact that my daughter
and grandkids are living here
with a bunch of
druggies and bums,
but it's still better than
Skid Row or the weekly moves
from one flea bag
hotel to the other.
And the church did agree
to give her and the kids
a place to stay while she
completed the necessary rehab
programs to regain
custody of her kids
that she lost after
they had been removed
by the state when
she failed to return
after a night of partying.
I'm happy that she's finally
getting her life together.
But I also fear that
history will repeat itself.
That was one of the reasons
why I bought property in Texas.
And the state told me
that she did everything
they required of her.
And she got her kids back.
But she's still staying in
this roach-infested place.
[CAR HORNS]
Hi.
PAM: Two months after I left,
the minister himself was caught
shooting up in a bathroom.
He lost the minister position
that he had at the church,
and the church has
since been closed down.
Guilt. Guilt at the fact
that I wasn't a good mom,
that I was running away.
You can't take
anymore, you chuck it
up and just get out of there.
But I saw that as my own
salvation, because if I stayed,
I was going to go
crazy, and I didn't know
what was going to happen next.
You're not going to abandon
me like dad did, are you?
I will always be your mom.
I'm very proud of you.
-All right.
I'll call you, OK?
OK.
[AIRPLANE ENGINES]
It's yours.
You can do with
it what you want.
OK.
PAM: And when she asked me
that, about, are you going
to abandon me, I
kept telling her,
I said, I'm just
a phone call away.
It's not a big deal, you know?
I'm not abandoning you.
But when I got on the
plane, that's exactly what
I felt I was doing.
And I was running away
from my daughter's problems
that I couldn't handle anymore.
And I always thought I'd be
stuck with raising up four
babies under the age of six.
60 years old.
In a few years.
My new life in Austin.
New home, new car, no
job, no health insurance.
Just a leap of faith.
My realtor invited me
to a drumming session
where I met several
women who asked
me to join them on the
trip to hike Machu Picchu.
The catch?
They were leaving in four days.
It was that leap of faith again.
I was able to synchronize
my travel schedule
with the other girls,
even an the zenith hour
before departure.
Amazing in itself.
I learned that most of the
people I'm about to meet
on this journey are
healers of sorts,
specializing in Reiki, some
sort of hands-on energy healing.
But it was my first
vacation in years,
and I was really looking forward
to relaxation and a reprieve
from my hectic life in LA.
We had a several hour
layover at the Lima airport
before connecting with
our flight to Cusco.
Upon our arrival, Edemid
Rossi, a Brazilian healer,
and our host greet us.
After formal introductions, we
grab some coffee at the food
lounge and Edemir suddenly, in
mid conversation turns to me
and says--
EDEMIR: You are from
the Atlantean lineage.
Your job on this journey is
to connect with with angels.
You are like a branch
that has no roots,
waving wildly in the wind.
Your life is going to
change dramatically.
PAM: I'm from Atlantis?
Our discussions at
the Lima airport
were strange enough as it
was, but when I walked off
that plane in
Cusco, I had no idea
what was still ahead for me.
As I grabbed my luggage, I
heard someone call my name.
It was Puma, a local shaman.
He startled me as he hugged me
and whispered in my ear, ah.
You're the warrior.
He said, that funny feeling
that you're experiencing?
It's not jet lag
or a lack of sleep,
but your soul recognizing
a coming home.
You've been here before, and
Cusco is welcoming you back.
And just as suddenly as he
appeared, Puma was gone.
We piled into a van and headed
to our hotel in Ollantaytambo.
The next morning, Edemir and
I decided to take a short hike
to the ruins before breakfast.
Our destination was a little
further up the mountain
than we had anticipated, so we
took a shortcut across a river.
[SCREAM]
Edemir immediately applied
Reiki, but by the time
we hiked back to town some
eight miles, by leg gave out.
As I limped into the
square, Jennifer,
the owner of a local
restaurant, coaxed me inside.
Taking off my shoes,
she examined my injury
and said she could help.
But upon closer
examination, she noticed
something was very
wrong, and asked
permission to call in a shaman.
It was Puma.
I will catch up with you!
PAM: The tendons in my foot
had separated from the bone.
After manipulation, a
ritual bath of human urine
and wrapping my foot and
ankle in a cast of herbs,
Puma prayed for intervention.
My dream of hiking the
Inca Trail was dashed.
The tour would
continue without me.
By the third day, and
sensing my depression,
our host, Joaquin, located the
sole pair of crutches in town.
I was now mobile.
Puma arranged for me to
join him on horseback
to a campout at the Glacier
for a native celebration.
In preparation for the trip,
we stopped at Puma's hometown
of Chinchero.
I learned that at age six,
Puma was struck by lightning
while swimming in a river.
This is an omen in
Andean tradition,
that an individual has
been chosen by God to walk
the path of the shamans.
After a cup of coca
tea, Puma lead me
to the site of his initiation
where his official training
began, tutored by his
grandfather, a great medicine
man and healer in his own right.
In Chinchero, main altars
were built always facing west.
And like many of the
sites in this place,
the reason why they did that
is because we are acknowledging
the path of our ancestors.
And that's why this
whole temple over here
was only for the eternal
bodies of mummified masters.
Some of them were
prophets, and were
others were leaders, governors,
masters, healers, and priests.
And because they were of very,
very important service while
in their physical
temple, they had
the privilege to be mummified.
And this is where
their temple was.
And in there, in this place
called Pumakaka, which we call
the rock of the puma, is
these two carved figures
you can see in the stone.
The big one over
there is a puma that
perhaps was looking towards
south or towards this side.
But when the Spaniards found
it, they cut the head off,
destroying the power
of the Inca people,
because the puma
represented that.
And in this huge
platform used to happen
the most important ceremonies.
And yet the puma was not facing
towards the ceremonial site,
but rather is facing this
way where perhaps this is
the place where
the most important
spiritual leaders used to come.
And there were, at the same
time, generals and warriors,
and they would initiate boys
and girls into being a man
and a woman, highly
enlightened, self-realized,
and at this point, they
have already lived,
they have already
experienced all the emotions.
They have already
seen everything
because they are
preparing as they
are ready to give a new life.
And yet their age is 13.
So boys and girls
would be initiated
here at the age of 13.
And what is so beautiful
that it still exists here
as the essence,
that the Spaniards
didn't find the little figure.
Or they found it,
they didn't touch it.
The little figure
is a baby puma.
You see?
There's the front crossed
legged, the head, the body,
the back legs, and the tail.
The beautiful part about
that is that the baby
puma is yet to wake up.
And that's what gives us the
hope in children and in youth
here in Chinchero, that there
have been an essence left
for all the children, for all
the young people, for them
to go-- like perhaps in
the path I went it was
initiated by this baby puma.
And I had to wake up
from being asleep.
So that is why it is
necessary to go to sleep
in order to wake up, huh?
And not only that, but while
the destructive energy came,
the puma was sleeping, and
that was its protection.
Which is interesting
medicine, no?
[LAUGH]
And the puma in the
Andes as our cosmo vision
is the power of will.
And the power of will does
not come from the mind
as it is usually known.
The power of will
comes from the heart.
And that's the
power of the puma.
And that's what we
needed to wake up.
That is why we were
here in this altar.
And when the power of will,
which moves everything
in the whole cosmos, wakes
up, and when you realize
that its root really is the
heart, and it's not your head,
it's not your limitations,
it's not your fears,
then I understood that it really
doesn't matter what you do.
That power of will
is actually cosmic,
and it will take you
to the directions
you are meant to arrive.
That really you might
choose, but you don't decide.
The cosmos decides.
And that is perhaps, when it
was decided by the cosmos,
we needed to wake up
that puma inside us here.
And that is why this
medicine is the medicine
for the whole world, especially
for the young people,
for the children.
Because they are the
stewards of life.
They are the
guardians of the path.
And the elders are not
so much even leaders.
They are witnesses of
a new life happening,
and a new life happening again.
That is why we say there is iny.
There's a moment when we
look after our children,
and that moment is so
delicate because we need
to be guardians of their path.
And in a thousandth of a second
that changes, and our children
need to look after us.
So there is that iny.
And oftentimes, a
lot of parents take
for granted their being parents,
and they think they always
have to look after the
children, and they forget
to be looked after, you know?
And there is the iny, there's
the sharing of the love,
there is the connection
of the family also.
When in that order,
families separate,
when that order families
split, in the cosmos
there's a huge unbalance.
In the cosmos is created what
we call perhaps scientifically
a black hole, a portal, so that
it can take all the sorrow, all
the traumas, all the
fears, all the pain,
all the emotional
heaviness and transmute it.
Take it to another
dimension of light, of love.
But at the same time, that
process in the microcosmos
is huge.
It is devastating.
Sometimes with that process,
it can take whole galaxies.
It can take whole
planetary systems.
And that is why
here in Chinchero
the relationship of family
is so delicate that it is
so precious, it is so sacred.
You don't take it for
granted, whether it
is your partner, your
children, your parents,
your grandparents.
You don't take your
family for granted.
And you are the one who has the
responsibility to not only help
it heal and guard it, but
also to lead it, to take it
to a whole different
level of life
where you go through the process
of emotions through the hurts,
through the traumas.
And then to a level
of celebration,
to a level of sharing.
But always together.
And that is what is necessary,
I think, in the world,
that everybody has
to have a mentor,
has to have someone
who will tell
them to the right or the left.
And in it, my
grandfather would say,
you have to listen to
yourself first and last.
[LAUGH]
PAM: Puma didn't know about
the situation I left behind.
I seemed to be
addressing my own fears,
my guilt. Was I
wrong in leaving?
I'm supposed to be the
guardian of my daughter's
path, her mentor, and I ran.
But then he tells me
that I need to let
go, like the
nesting bird pushing
the babies out of the nest.
I pondered his messages as we
loaded our gear on the horses
and proceeded to the
top of the glacier.
It was dark when we
finally reached the summit.
I gasped at the
brightness of the stars.
I'd never seen the Milky Way.
So close you feel as
though you can almost
touch it with your fingers.
Exhausted and shivering
from the cold,
Puma covered me with a tarp as
the singing and pounding drums
continued throughout the night.
The next morning, I awoke to
see an entire community that
had gathered on top this
glacier, 16,000 feet above sea
level in the Sinaqara Valley.
I'm told that this glacier
has been rapidly disappearing,
and that just 10 years ago, the
area where we are now camping
used to be totally
submerged in snow and ice.
As I shivered from the
cold, I watched these people
dancing and singing,
most of them barefoot
or wearing just sandals.
I was overwhelmed by the
faith of these people.
Over 100,000 people
come up here every year
to celebrate Qoillorritti.
Qoillorritti is an
annual event that
has been kept in
secret for many years,
but has its origins dating
back to early Inca times.
The tradition is to
go up to the glacier
and gather the ice as new water,
as new life, a new direction.
These are people who come
from various lifestyles,
various communities,
far away distances.
And not just from Peru,
but some journeying
all the way from North
America, Europe, Asia.
And these people,
just like me, come
perhaps not consciously
knowing what
this pilgrimage is all about.
And yet I am told that we
will all receive the healing,
that all of this harmonized
and healed energy
is going to be for
the land to where
we came from, for our families,
and for our communities.
As we proceeded
down the mountains,
I mentioned to Puma
what Edemir had told
me about being from Atlantis.
He must have sensed
my disbelief.
Before I knew it,
12 hours later,
I found myself in Bolivia.
We'll be entering into what
is the realm of our ancestors.
Humanity before this one
were perhaps belonging
to the Atlantean civilizations.
And we'll be entering into
the mysteries of these people,
and what message they
left for these times
and for the humanity now.
They say that the era of
133 years before Christ
through 900 after Christ was the
best part of Tiwanaku culture.
And yet, this is only
the physical signs.
And knowing how limited it
has been in its research
and in its way of
finding out really,
this culture has developed
much more before that,
and its best times were
always at the beginning.
Because later, because of
weather or because of whatever
situations, this culture had
to also struggle to survive
and had to move to different
parts of the Andes.
And this is how the Inca
civilization even is born.
The origins of this
whole civilization
is here, in this
place, in this land.
This is the roots.
This is the source.
And like always in the
saying of the elders,
you must always remember
where you come from.
There's your power, there's your
roots, there's your strength.
And that is why we
are here in Tiwanaku.
And here we are in what they
call the underground temple.
This is the place where they
found the monolith of Bennett,
as they call it.
The monolith of Mother Earth.
But interestingly, all
the rocks extending out
represent the different
races of humanity.
This is basically
a temple dedicated
to the races of humanity.
Asian, African, everywhere.
Everywhere.
You name one, it's here.
And the head represents where
our brain, where our mind is.
And knowing how limited,
knowing how rational are,
in these temples
is where they used
to heal the head of the whole
of humanity in our planet.
This is the place
where they would take
the limited mentality,
the rationality,
the making sense of everything.
They were able to heal
that here in this temple.
This is why I say
that healing does not
happen at an individual level.
Not only does it happen at
a family level and community
level, it happens in
temples like this,
happening to the level
of races of humanity.
That's at the level
we need to heal.
Globally.
PAM: A chill ran up my back.
Was this another
sign of recognition?
Puma explained that
sites such as this
were erected as actual doors or
portals used by our ancestors
to receive the knowledge
of the universe
directly from the heavens,
giving each of us that innate
wisdom, and connecting us
with the beings of light
from other galaxies.
Further down the
road, we entered
into a new archaeological dig.
PUMA: Puma Gate.
That is a recent name that
it had put to this place.
What we will appreciate
here in terms of symbols,
in terms of carvings, in terms
of highly advanced technology
in working with rock, belongs
to the Lemurian people
who were the ancestors
of the Atlanteans.
And because in the
Atlantean civilization
there were many events
happening where they broke
many cosmic laws, also
where they brought life
to an unbalance, that
way Mother Earth had
to use her four
elements in order
to purify and clean herself.
And with that, the
Atlantean civilization was
going to disappear completely.
And with that, also the
ancestry of the Lemurian people.
The Mu people were the
ancestors of the Atlanteans.
And because of the technology,
because of the magnitude
of carving and work in here
and of knowing all the laws
of the cosmos of
basically using levity
has the polarity of gravity and
taking the molecular weight out
of the rocks, such
technologies were
only known by these people.
And that is why, perhaps,
we called this Pumapunko
as the last Lemurian portal.
Everything is a portal.
This is a place that tells you
that your eyes are portals,
that your ear--
hearing is portals,
that your words are portals.
That your whole temple is a
portal, that your heart is
a portal, that
your belly button,
your navel is a portal, that
your sexual gland is a portal.
That you as a woman have a womb,
that there's a portal into.
Everything is portals.
And you choose to
be open or closed.
PAM: As we began our journey
back to Peru I asked Puma,
there are so many
people out there
representing themselves
as spiritual guides,
leaders of the path.
How do you recognize true
or false prophets, guides?
PUMA: While we're looking for
guides, while we're looking
for guidance, with
this intent that which
maintains us on the path,
which is the sacred fire.
Sacred fire that is in each
human being, in every person.
That besides their thinking,
besides their personality,
besides their way of being,
they are already that light.
They are already
that sacred spirit.
And when you look, when
you see at a person,
you see that sacred fire.
You see that love,
in spite of whatever
else is their appearance.
And you listen, and
you respect, and you
honor that being, that person.
Being on a path, being
in life with the process.
And you listen.
Because grandfather
would say, in the people
that you less think of, there
is where your teachers are.
There is where your guides are.
So you don't look for them.
They will find you.
PAM: As we left Bolivia,
I mentioned to Puma
that I had overheard
some of my travel mates
talk about the end of the
Mayan calendar in 2012,
and the subsequent destruction
of earth as we know it.
As we waited for the bus,
Puma explained this in terms
used by the Quechua elders.
PUMA: We have here what
we call a taripay pacha,
a time in which we're entering
into a major transition
as humanity.
And Mother Earth will
allow a lot of our healing
and a lot of our spiritual
growth and awakening
in this transition.
We call it first
there is pachacuti.
Pachacuti is a time and space.
Ancient energies, ancient
wisdom, ancient knowledge,
ancestors coming back
and reorganizing.
Helping us wake up, helping
us heal, helping us transform.
That is what we
call a pachacuti.
In the process, we have to
go through a taripay pacha.
Taripay pacha
means not a new way
of life, not new steps in life.
But rather that time and space
will catch up with our growth.
Meaning the eternal
knowledge, the eternal wisdom,
and the eternal
consciousness will again
be integrated into our lives.
And that will
allow our awakening
and our transformation in
this moment of transition
that Mother Earth
is going through,
which will also affect the whole
cosmos and the whole universe.
So the taripay pacha
is for all of us
to become the elders, for all
of us to become the wise ones,
for all of us to become
the healers, the leaders.
PAM: Once back in Peru, our
first stop was in Cusco, where
I received a follow-up
from my ankle injury,
and I was introduced to
Mother Irene, a local healer.
PUMA: This little
baby got burned three
days ago with very hot stuff.
So he's back.
He's hurt.
But they're going to heal.
[BABY CRYING]
Whenever children have
these problems, what
they need healing for
is not only the body,
but also for the spirit.
So they're taking care of the
energetic part of the baby.
They will be healing its spirit.
And whatever traumas or
whatever fear that the baby has
will be liberated and cleansed.
In three days, you
could see how the body
has recuperated so fast.
Because they use natural herbs.
Irene has everything
prepared ready.
PAM: And this was a burn from
the fireplace from an oven,
right?
PUMA: Yeah.
But the physical part is not
the most important, you see?
A lot of these
children, when they
go through these experiences,
they catch a very strong trauma
because their psychological
temple is 10 times more
vulnerable than
ours as an adult.
So it is important to heal the
emotional and the spiritual
part also, because
that is going to affect
the rest of their lives,
even when they become adults.
The same thing's
happening to the baby
over there too, because
he fell down on the steps.
And so they're
trying to heal all
the trauma that he might have.
Notice how the
child is completely
focused, and
receives the healing.
Because they learn from very
young that this is important.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
PUMA: OK.
And you can see at the end, she
will do a reading in the water,
which is sort of like an oracle,
about how each person is,
how each baby is.
We have the sacred plants,
the medicinal plants.
Just like we have each
one of us a specific gift,
whether it is in our
knowledge, whether it
is in our activities, whether
it's in something we do.
Same way plants also have
a specific gift for us.
And for centuries, our ancestors
have been working with them,
and have been using
them for healing
in various different ways.
One thing I have learned
about medicinal plants
from my grandmother is that
there's a whole family of them.
You must recognize the
grandmother plants,
the grandfather plants, the
parents, and the children,
and the grandchildren.
For example, the ancestral
plans or the elder plants
would be like Wachuma as
they know it as San Pedro
or Ayahusca, or [INAUDIBLE].
All these master
plants that we used
only in a very sacred way
for the deepest awakening.
And the other
plants, the parents,
would be the ones that
are important if you
have infections, if
you have inflammation.
But you also use
them internally.
And some of the younger
plants are the ones
that you use externally.
Instead of an antibiotic, you
could use some of these plants.
And the other medicine
are new plants.
New plants, the children
plants, are the ones
that you could use them in tea
every day if it's good for you.
Or you could use them in baths.
You could put them
in the specific pots
and bathe with them.
These plans are at the level
that they give themselves
completely in service
for our well being,
for our being balanced and
for our being in good health,
and for us being
in life connected
and grounded and happy.
So that is why medicinal
plants are a very important
part of our healing also.
PAM: It starts feeling
better the more you do it.
Yeah.
[LAUGH]
It is the only thing
that starts feeling
better the more you do it.
[LAUGHTER]
PAM: And the reason
for doing this is--
You're not supposed to
feel cold after the bathe.
MAN: And don't move
until tomorrow.
PAM: And don't
move till tomorrow!
[LAUGHTER]
Good try.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
OK, so the bath that
you just had also
is very good for your ankles.
Because when you hurt them,
your cells had a trauma.
So all of that gets cleared away
with these medicinal plants.
So it's not only for
the physical part.
It is also for the
energetic, for the spiritual,
for the emotional, for
the psychological part.
PAM: Before departing, Mother
Irene offered to read my cards.
In closing she says, it was
necessary for you to leave.
You've done the right thing.
You have a great mission.
The people you left behind could
not grow if you had remained.
The path that you have
taken is the correct path.
I left behind a 15
year relationship
with a man I thought
I would grow old with,
and a home that I
thought would be my last.
I left my friends,
my family, my career.
And suddenly, in
the past seven days,
I am told by three different
shamans that I have a mission.
I'm a middle aged
woman, now alone.
What power do I have?
Puma continued his teachings
as we headed to the Sacred
Valley and Machu Picchu.
Behind here, we
have Machu Picchu.
We believe that is
perhaps one of the origins
of the name for Machu Picchu.
Machu Picchu, as they
say, is to Quechua
words which means old mountain.
And perhaps more than that, it
actually means the old bird.
Machu Picchu.
Wherever our ancestors
had found sacred temples,
there had to be
two mountaintops.
One of the mountaintops
is wayna picchu,
which is young mountain,
and machu picchu,
which is the old mountain.
So in one mountain range, if
they could find two peaks,
that was for them
a sacred symbol.
Also, it is believed
that Machu Picchu
was built as a sacred
altar for Salkantay.
And Apus Salkantay is a mountain
spirit that is perhaps the most
important in this region.
It is hardly accessible,
and in the spiritual sense,
every medicine man
and medicine woman
had to journey to
this mountain in order
to be initiated, in
order to be enlightened.
And a lot of people
have tried to arrive
to the summit of this
mountain, and many people
even haven't returned.
So we believe that this
mountain is protected.
That's why we call it salka,
which means wild mountain.
And a way for our ancestors to
arrive to its actual essence
of what this
mountain represented
was for them journeying
to Machu Picchu.
Because they would take a trail,
what we call an Inca trail,
for journeying for a long
time, preparing themselves
in these specific places,
and arriving into Machu
Picchu in pilgrimage.
So perhaps this
place was also kept
in secret because
of that, because
of being an altar to Salkantay.
Also the belief is
that in this place,
why the Spaniards
never found it,
not only because the Incas left
it burned, but also because it
was built in a strategic
point in the mountains
where it is almost part
of the mountain range.
And you can only
find it if you're
coming through the
top of the mountains
like we are now on
the top of a mountain.
So if you are down in the
valley near the river,
it is almost impossible
that you could
have found it even
if you knew that it
was going to be around here.
So the reason why
that was also is
because it gives you the
feeling that you are a condor.
That is why you are always
at the top of the mountain.
That is why you
are always up high.
And in sometimes of the year,
filled with mist and clouds,
so it's almost like you're
always in the heavens.
And in Machu Picchu, the
medicine for this time,
for this area is feminine.
Perhaps that is why they
found a priestess mummy that
was the most important person in
Machu Picchu, and was a woman.
They found her with all the
ceremonial regalia and the pots
and instruments for rituals.
And so we believe, in
the spiritual sense,
that Machu Picchu was the
sacred temple of the Amazonas
warriors, which
were women that were
initiated at the age of 13 as
chosen princesses of the sun.
And they were trained
physically, spiritually,
and emotionally to be the
leaders, to be the healers,
to be the governors, to be the
warriors for the whole Inca
civilization.
And here in Machu
Picchu was the place
where they used to be born,
where they used to be trained,
where they used to be initiated.
The Amazonas
warriors, which were
like the CIA of the Inca times.
These people were highly
trained in all levels.
They could put you to sleep
just with their thought
is what the legends say.
These people were hatun
munanio, as we call.
And hatun means big, and
munanio means big love.
So these people had a
big, big, big, heart.
If anything they developed
very well was their love.
And their love for our planet,
their love for their path,
for the spiritual journey they
had, for the Inca civilization,
for the father son.
And so they were like
warriors who would not only
protect the
civilization, but also
be the leaders and the
guardians and the witnesses
of life unfolding
every thousandth
of a second in their lives.
Highly powerful princesses.
And also perhaps we can
say, because of the condor,
some people arrived
to Machu Picchu
to leave their physical bodies.
When they were elders, they
would journey for many years
to this place, and
they would arrive here.
And with the help of
perhaps sacred plants
or some transcending
meditation, they would
leave their physical body.
And they would be
afterwards mummified.
And they were first
placed in a condor altar
here in Machu Picchu that
is in a flying position.
And it is facing east.
The two meanings that
this condor temple has
is that our ancestors could
be coming from the west
and arriving and bringing all
the wisdom and all the strength
for life to continue.
All the sacred knowledges,
all the sacred formulas
for architecture, engineering,
and the administration.
And the other meaning would
be as it's flying to the east,
taking all these
beings that have
been mummified to the light.
Our ancestors used to
come to these terraces,
and in ceremony they would
receive the first light,
the first rays of the sun.
And the sun for our
ancestors represented
the physical manifestation
of the father of God.
And now they are
the only beings that
receive in ceremony the sun
is the llamas that live here.
And these sacred cameloids for
us represents service of love.
So for those of us who
will recognize our symbols
and our sacred
ancient teachings,
we would realize that whatever
we see these beings receiving
the sun in this way, we are
reminded that this day is a day
to serve, that this
day is a day to be
in absolute and
unconditional service of love
to all our family,
to all our community.
Grandfather wold
always say, when
you're in the sacred temples,
how would you rather be?
Would you rather be
conscious of the energy?
Would you rather be conscious
of everything that is happening?
Or would you like
to be unconscious?
And I would say,
conscious, grandfather.
[LAUGH]
He would say, oh, boy.
You continue limiting yourself.
Because when you are conscious,
your mind is in charge,
and your mind wants to
make sense of everything.
Wants to understand
it, wants to limit
it in your complete experience.
And he would tell
me that when you
are unconscious
through it all, you are
completely receiving the magic.
Because in the
unconscious level,
all the magic is happening.
And your mind, instead
of making sense,
in loses sense of it all.
And then you are
completely open to receive
all the energy,
all the magic, all
the healing that can happen.
When we talk about
our mountain spirits,
when we talk about
God, transcends
gender really, and ourselves.
In essence, we are
not a man or a woman.
Our soul, our spirit
transcends that.
Though we are coming into
this physical temple,
we are coming into this
sacred planet as a man
or a woman for a reason.
And that is why we need to
consider ourselves, our bodies,
as sacred temples.
And oftentimes in
most places I have
heard the weak gender
or the weak sex
when they are
speaking of a woman.
And the first thing
I ask them is, well,
talking about a weak sex or
talking about a weak gender,
how does a woman give birth?
Just that even.
And as a man, would we be able
to support so much pain and so
much suffering to the point
that a woman can give her life
for the life of another child?
And that is the offering
of Mother Earth.
That is perhaps why when we
talk about pachamama here,
when a girl is born, the
moment she is a girl at birth,
she represents Mother Earth.
And in essence, all women
represent pachamama.
And that's how sacred
you are as women.
And in our traditions,
there had to be
a delicate and a
specific care for all
the girls that were growing.
For example, one of the
teachings that I remember
in our communities is that
when a girl starts being 13,
they tell her, when you are
in love, be very delicate
and be very careful when
you're offering yourself
to another being,
to another person,
especially if you're
thinking that that person is
going to be your husband.
Because he's not going to
grow from your shoulder,
they would say.
He will either die or
leave with another woman.
That is what they tell the
girls in the communities.
And so a lot of girls are
already being trained that
life is about
non-attachment, that
you cannot take for granted.
And especially in love, which
is where most of the time we get
hurt.
And perhaps that is
one of the teachings
that our ancestors
have left to us.
Because whenever we
have attachments,
that is where we get
hit first or most
when the waves of the energy
of hurt and destruction come.
They hit us first
in our attachments.
But when a being is prepared,
when a person is being already
trained from very early
time, from childhood,
that life is not to
take for granted,
that love is not to
take for granted.
So we can't have attachments.
And when you realize that
true love liberates you,
is about liberation and
not about possession,
then really there's more
harmony and there's more peace.
Here in the Andes we
have this philosophy
of the yanantin-masantin.
Yanantin is a connection,
is a unity of two
beings that can be together.
And it can be of
the same gender,
it can be of opposite genders.
It is not necessarily
a relationship of love.
Sometimes it
transcends even that.
It is a relationship of two
beings who want to be together,
a sacred power that
together only they
can be of great service,
great, great service.
They become allies.
They become a team that
can be inseparable.
That yanantin is very,
very powerful to the point
that in the Andes,
it was considered
as something more powerful even
than a relationship of love
or of partners.
And then the masantin,
yanantin-masantin
was only applied to
couples, to partners
who would choose
to walk together
in life and in their path.
And it had to be
specifically of a woman
and a man in yanantin-masantin.
Why?
Because of the polarity.
There had to be
the sacred balance.
Every medicine man,
every paco, have
to have its yanantin-masantin in
order to be in complete harmony
and in complete
balance in the cosmos.
PAM: To know that the
leaders of this sacred land
were all powerful women
gave me newfound strength.
But I wonder, if,
as a human race
we are headed towards a major
calamity in the next few years,
is there any way we can change
course and save our planet?
And in the process,
ourselves and our families?
Puma introduced me to the
prophecy of the condor
and the eagle flying
together, a prophecy that
is literally written in stone.
PUMA: There's a whole
oracle of the secret trilogy
in this altar.
There's a whole oracle for
the people of the north
and the people of the south.
There's a whole oracle
for the eagle people
and the condor people.
When you look at
these two birds,
there is a very, very strong
difference between these two.
Here is the tails of both.
The wings of this one
is coming forwards,
and this one is
coming backwards.
Two different birds.
The condor in the Andes, when it
flies, it flies as if hugging.
And you can see the
wings sort of forwards.
And the eagle, because
it's a hunting bird,
it has the wings
backwards like this.
So this is a condor,
this is an eagle.
So the prophecy of the condor
and the eagle flying together
is not so much a prophecy.
For us, it is an
eternal reality.
People of the north and the
south in the spiritual level
are always connected.
We're always connected, and
will always be connected.
As people, as humans,
the condor people,
meaning the people of
the southern hemisphere,
is this puma,
represented by this puma.
The puma represents the power
of love, the power of will,
the power of the heart.
This puma has the
tail straight up.
The tail of the puma in
the Andean cosmic vision
represents all of
its personality.
So if it has a tail straight
up, it's in a warrior position.
And the back legs are over here.
The front legs are
hugging Mother Earth,
and the head here
kissing, like giving
the breath to Mother Earth.
Meaning that the people of the
south, people of the Andes,
our main actions are focused on
pachamama, on our Mother Earth.
All our ceremonies, all our
philosophy, all our traditions,
all our actions
every day are focused
on pachamama, Mother Earth.
And we are the guardians
and the stewards
of all of these ancient
traditions for a reason.
That is why a lot of
the messages, a lot
of the sacred knowledge
of the ancient ones
is yet to be revealed
to the world.
A lot of it was kept in secret.
The people of the north,
of the northern hemisphere,
is this puma.
It's sleeping.
Here's the back legs.
The front legs are crossed.
Here's the tail.
Tail around pachamama
means control,
taking all the resources,
taking everything.
That is the people of the north.
It involves all the northern
countries across the equator
from the northern hemisphere.
And the southern puma involves
all the southern countries
below the equator.
So what is most interesting in
geology is that our Andes being
tall mountains are very
young, very, very young
mountains compared to the
Appalachians, to the Rockies,
to the mountain
ranges in the north.
Interestingly, these two
pumas have a difference.
That one is a young puma,
the puma of the south.
This could be the
father or the mother.
Because at this level,
they transcend gender.
When this puma wakes up, being
the mother or the father,
has the power to bring
change to the world.
That is what we see,
that is what we know,
and that is what
our ancestors have
left as a very clear
message for these times,
for these generations.
From pachamama comes
out the serpent,
the sacred
consciousness, the sacred
psychological and emotional
temple of our ancestors.
These are the serpent,
meaning all our philosophies,
all our practices, all
our ceremonies are just
coming out of Mother Earth.
It's coming from pachamama,
meaning all our wisdom
is rooted in Mother Earth.
Where the serpent of the
north is coming from where?
Around here.
And it's meeting in
this point, two of them.
Where is the connection to
Mother Earth in the north?
Perhaps that is why in
the north you always
connect to great spirit,
to all our relations,
because your connection
is with the sky.
And here in the south, our
connection is with pachamama,
with Mother Earth.
That is to be the balance,
that is to be the polarity.
And yet, this representing
the psychological
and the emotional
temple of our being,
our consciousness, this serpent
of the north is also bigger
and the serpent of
the south is smaller.
It is not coincidence.
This one has a very
harmonious curve.
See?
Very strong.
This one has a sharp turn.
You see?
I think this one is pushing
it, which means arrogance.
There's a lot of
arrogance in the north.
This is the message
that need to go now.
Here in the south, where
people can recognize
to be that Puma, where they
can reclaim their own power
and be the guardians
and stewards
of this sacred pachamama.
Where people in the north can
recognize to be this puma,
to recognize that they are
sleeping and that they need to
wake up.
This is the oracle of
a condor and an eagle.
This is the oracle for
humanity for these times.
And the message
is very powerful.
Puma, you keep saying
that we need to wake up.
What do you mean?
You are the puma.
Waking up represents recognizing
completely who you are,
that there's a deeper
Pamela inside you
that needs to wake up.
That who you are right
now is who you are,
but there's deeper inside, more.
In fact, to know that there's
a puma sleeping inside you,
that your complete power
of will to change weathers,
to change your
directions, to change
the reality of your
family, to change
community, to change
the reality of Mother
Earth, that power of will
is sleeping in you.
That is what it means when
that puma is sleeping.
Because you see,
the US or Canada,
for example, has the power.
You have the power
because of the technology.
You have because of
the resources you have,
because of the financial
possibly you have
to bring change to the world.
You're just not doing it because
that will is not woken up yet.
Once that love, once that
will is completely awake,
nothing will be
able to stop that.
It is in the cosmic flow.
PAM: Puma remarked
that my injury was
part of my spiritual healing.
All I know is that
after 10 days,
my foot and ankle were
completely healed,
and I felt lighter.
But as soon as arrived
back in the States,
the pain in my foot
and ankle returned.
So I sought the advice
of a medical doctor.
I think he thought I was nuts.
Your ankle's fine.
So what do you want from me?
When I was in Peru, what I
thought was a simple ankle
sprain, a local shaman
who worked on me
said it was more serious.
And I understand
from the translation,
it was either I-- the
ligaments or the nerves
in my-- had just
separated from the bone.
So he pushed the
nerves back into place,
and then he wrapped my ankle
and foot in a herbal cast,
uh, I guess to control
the swelling and pain.
But which it actually did,
because I was able to hike
Machu Picchu three days later.
And, um, was it--
by the seventh day,
I was actually able to
put weight on my foot
and with no pain.
But when I arrived back
in the United States,
the pain returned and increased.
Well, from what
you told me, maybe
your quick recovery
was from getting
immediate medical attention.
[LAUGH]
No, that's not true.
You see, after the
initial injury,
I ended up hiking four miles
up a mountain, four miles down
a mountain, and
another three miles
into town before
my leg gave out.
Well, all I can
say is, nice sprain.
Lose the crutches
when you can and bear
weight as you feel comfortable.
PAM: I was intrigued.
As quickly as the
questions arose in my mind,
just as Puma told me,
people and teachers
began entering my life.
I traveled to Mexico and
met healer Maria Teresa
Valenzuela who had studied with
the experts from NASA's Hubble.
After giving a scientific-based
analogy of what to expect
in 2012, merging the indigenous
teachings with science,
Maria offered a bit of
advice as to what each of us
can do in preparation for
these upcoming changes.
We're under this deep, deep
hypnosis for whatever reason.
But to me, we need to wake up.
We're running out of time.
We need to simplify our lives.
We need to really let
go of a lot of the stuff
that we run every
weekend to the malls,
we run to the
supermarkets to buy
things that sit on the
shelves and collect dust.
I've seen people that have
these closets full of food
that they never use.
We need to let go of our
attachments, things that
just don't serve us anymore.
We as human beings need
tremendous healings
from our addictions.
And our addiction's in
many, many, many forms.
I can go to alcohol,
drugs, the television,
our addictions of privilege.
That's a big one.
You know, the sense of
privilege that we're more
dominant than the other one.
Our addictions of our
emotions, of our angers.
They need to get rid
of their credit cards.
By growing your own
gardens, learning
to walk lighter in
life, you will not need
this dense card, this density.
So I ask, get rid of them.
Pay up your debts.
They need to come
into communities.
OK, working in communities
is very important.
I see a lot of people that are
very, very lonely in cities.
They live by themselves.
So I ask, have you
ever thought of maybe
finding an empty apartment
house in a group of your friends
that you really like,
do, like, co-housing?
And then also, like, if
people live in neighborhoods
that maybe once a week they
come together as a community
and they work as a community.
That's where the
gardens come in.
And another thing that is
very important in these times
is that you need to take
care of your bodies.
As you know, everything
is more polluted.
And as we move a little bit
forward in these coming years,
it is said that
everything is going
to get even more polluted,
and that more death is coming.
So that each of us needs to
exercise more, eat better,
do more walking.
And I can leave you
with this message
that I truly, truly do believe.
That there's no reason
to fear the future,
because we come from the future.
We come from the stars.
So there is no
reason to fear it.
There's wonderful
possibilities up there.
PAM: I learned about kinesiology
from Sonny Molina, a shaman
I met who practices sports
medicine at the Sanada
Clinic in San Antonio, Texas.
He taught me how your body
can talk to you, giving
you the answers to
all your questions,
whether simple or abstract.
This was all now
beginning to make sense.
I started making
changes in my own mind.
I joined a neighborhood
garden club.
I started growing
my own vegetables.
I actually know the
names of my neighbors.
I excitedly shared by newfound
knowledge with my daughter.
And with each new
piece of information,
she began to apply these
tools to her own life.
Soon after, she got
a good paying job
and moved into an
apartment with the kids,
their first real apartment.
And then the challenges began.
Robert, Ariana's estranged mate,
had been released from prison.
Despite a restraining
order, he continued
to stalk Ariana and the kids.
She knew he was using again.
They had traded text messages
over the past several days.
She told him if he
continued doing drugs,
he would never see
his kids again.
[TIRES SQUEALING]
I feel like cracking you
right here, right now.
You're not cracking
anybody in front of my kids.
[TIRES SQUEALING]
[CHILDREN CRYING]
After Robert was arrested
and taken into custody,
the police assured her that
she had done the right thing.
But the next day when she
went to pick up the kids
from childcare, they were gone.
All four children were now
wards of the court again.
The Department of
Social Services
alleged he had placed
them in harm's way
and that she was an
unfit mother because she
was unable to protect them.
And that was pure bullshit.
I need a favor.
[DOG BARKING]
[KNOCKING]
[MACHINERY GRINDING]
PUMA: You are the puma.
Waking up represents
recognizing completely
who you are as a woman, as
a mother, as a grandmother,
as a daughter, as
a granddaughter.
There is a deeper power, there
is a deeper self inside you
that has been limited because
of fear, because of whatever
process you went through
in life that has gone
to the deepest
parts of who you are
and did not completely express.
Who you are is not who
you see in the mirror.
The best of who you
are is yet to come up.
[KNOCKING]
It's all there.
[SEAGULLS  CHIRPING]
PAM: It took another
three months to convince
the authorities that they
had erred in their decision
to remove the kids.
But in the end,
all four children
were returned to her custody.
I don't know what
the future holds,
but I do know that fear
is no longer a part of it.
I have the power
within myself to change
the direction of my life.
By healing my own hurts, my
family can begin to heal.
We're all interconnected.
We are all keepers of the light.
That power, that knowledge
resides inside all of us.
All we have to do is to
wake up that sleeping puma.
[BABY TALK]
PAM: Puma says it's
not the time spent
at Machu Picchu that
changes your life,
it's what you walk away with.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So we're coming down
from Putucisu Mountain.
And the omen of the path is
this line of caterpillars.
It's a powerful symbol
because first of all,
you don't see so
many caterpillars
in a line like this.
The second part is that
from being limited,
already in pilgrimage and
together, they will all
liberate and they will all
grow their multicolored wings,
and transformation will happen.
This is the omen
of this project.
This is the symbolism that
we are reading in the cosmos.
And there's a whole community,
there's families in our planet,
in the whole globe, that
are going to be arriving
to this transformation.
The good thing is that we are
already on the path together.
There was one time a
big fire in the forest.
And all the animals
were running away.
And in the middle
of all this chaos,
there was this hummingbird
that would come all the way
to the river, drink a
little bit of water,
come back to the fire, and
spit it out in the fire.
And he would do this back
and forth, many times.
And in the process, the
deer tells him, hummingbird,
why don't you run with us?
Run with us.
You know, you are never going
to be able to put this fire out.
And the hummingbird said
to the deer, yeah, maybe.
Though at least I
have done my part.
And that was the answer
of the hummingbird,
and that is the message
of such a wisdom,
that as big as the chaos
may be in the world,
there's a part we play.
And as small as it may be it
will affect the microcosmos.
And like this
hummingbird, we should
always recognize that there
is always something we can do.
[MUSIC PLAYING]